living in Africa is to be on the edge
metaphorically and quite literally when
you think about connectivity before 2008
there were many human intellectual and
technological leaps that happened in
Europe and the rest of the world but
Africa was sort of cut off and that
changed first with ships when we had the
Renaissance the Scientific Revolution
and also the Industrial Revolution and
now we've got the digital revolution
these revolutions have not been evenly
distributed across continents and
nations never have been now this is a
map of the undersea fiber optic cables
that connect Africa to the rest of the
world what I find amazing is that Africa
is transcending its geography problem
Africa is connecting to the rest of the
world and within itself the connectivity
situation has improved greatly but some
barriers remain it is with this context
that uh Shahidi came to be in 2008 one
of the problems that we faced was a lack
of information flow there was a media
blackout in 2008 when there was
post-election violence in Kenya it was a
very tragic time was a very difficult
time so we came together and we created
software called OSHA Headey and OSHA he
means testimony or witness in Swahili
I'm very lucky to work with two amazing
collaborators this is David and Eric I
call them brothers from another mother
clearly I have a German mother somewhere
and we worked together first with
building and growing of Shahidi and the
idea of the software was to gather
information from SMS email and web and
put a map so that you could see what was
happening where and you could visualize
that data and after that initial
prototype we set out to make free and
open source software so that others do
not have to start from scratch like we
did all the while we also wanted to give
back to the local tech community that
helped us grow Osia Healy and supported
us in those early days and that's why we
set up the
in Nairobi an actual physical space
where we could collaborate and it is now
part of an integral tech ecosystem in
Kenya we did that with the support of
different organizations like MacArthur
Foundation and Omidyar Network and we
were able to grow this software
footprint and a few years later it
became very useful software and we were
quite humbled when it was used in Haiti
where citizens could indicate where they
are and what their needs were and also
to deal with the fallout from the
nuclear crisis and the tsunami in Japan
now this year the internet turns 20 and
OSHA he turned five we Shaheed is not
only the software that we made it is the
team and it's also the community that
uses this technology in ways that we
could not foresee we did not imagine
that there'd be this many Maps around
the world there are crisis maps election
maps corruption maps and even
environmental monitoring crowd maps we
are humbled that this has roots in Kenya
and that it has some use to people
around the world trying to figure out
the different issues that they're
dealing with there is more that we're
doing to explore this idea of collective
intelligence that I as a citizen if I
share the information with whatever
device that I have could inform you
about what is going on and that if you
do the same we can have a bigger picture
of what's going on I moved back to Kenya
in 2011 Eric moved in 2010 very
different reality I used to live in
Chicago where those abundance internet
access I never had to deal with a
blackout and in Kenya it's a very
different reality and one thing that
remains despite the leaps in progress
and the digital revolution is the
electricity problem the day to day
frustrations of dealing with this can be
let's just say very annoying blackouts
are not fun imagine sitting down to
start working and all of a sudden the
power goes out your internet connection
goes down with it
so you have to figure out okay now
where's the modem how do I switch back
and then guess what
you have to deal with it again now this
is the reality of Kenya where we live
now and other parts of Africa the other
problem that we're facing is that
communication costs are also still a
challenge it costs me five Kenya
shillings or point zero six USD to call
the US Canada or China guess how much it
costs to called Rwanda Ghana Nigeria 30
Kenya shillings that's six times the
cost to connect with in Africa and also
when traveling within Africa you've got
different settings for different mobile
providers this is the reality that we
deal with so we've got a joke in OSHA
Headey where we say if it works in
Africa to work anywhere what if we could
overcome the problem of unreliable
internet and electricity and reduce the
cost of connection could we leverage the
cloud we've built crowd map we've built
OSHA he could we leverage these
technologies to switch smartly whenever
you travel from country to country so we
looked at the modem an important part of
the infrastructure of the internet and
asked ourselves why the modems that
we're using right now are built for a
different context where you've got
ubiquitous internet you've got a big
crisis electricity yet we sit here in
Nairobi and we do not have that luxury
we wanted to redesign the modem for the
developing world for our context and for
our reality what if we could have
connectivity with less friction this is
the brick it acts as a backup to the
internet so that when the power goes out
it fails over and connects to the
nearest GSM network mobile connectivity
in Africa is pervasive it's actually
everywhere most towns at least have a 3G
connection so why don't we leverage that
and that's why we built this the other
reason that we built this is when
electricity goes down this has eight
hours of battery life so you
can continue working you can continue
being productive and let's just say
you're less stressed and for rural areas
it can be the primary means of
connection the software sensibility
@osha he is still at play when we
wondered how can we use the cloud to be
more intelligent so that you can analyze
the different networks and whenever you
switch on the backup you pick on the
fastest network so we will have multi
sim capability so it can put multiple
sims and if one network is faster that's
the one you hop on and if the uptime on
that is not very good then you hop on to
the next one the idea here is for you to
be able to connect anywhere with load
balancing this can be possible the other
interesting thing for us we like sensors
is this idea that you could have an
on-ramp for the Internet of Things
imagine a weather station that can be
attached to this it's built in a modular
way so that you can also attach a
satellite module so that you could have
Internet connectivity even in very
remote areas out of adversity can come
innovation and how can we help the
ambitious coders and makers in Kenya to
be resilient in the face of problematic
infrastructure and for us we begin with
solving the problem in our own backyard
in Kenya it is not with our challenge
our team have basically been meals
carrying components from us to Kenya
we've had very interesting conversations
with customs border agents what are you
carrying and the local financing is not
an idea it's not part of the ecosystem
for supporting hardware project so we
put it on Kickstarter and I'm happy to
say that through the support of many
people not only here but online the
brick has been kick-started and now the
the interesting part of bringing this to
market begins I will close by saying
that if we solve this for the local
market
it could be impactful not only for the
coders in Nairobi but also for small
business owners who need reliable
connectivity and it can reduce the cost
of connecting
and hopefully collaboration within
African countries the idea is that the
building blocks of the digital economy
are connectivity and entrepreneurship
the brick is our part to keep Africans
connected and to help them drive the
global digital revolution thank you
[Applause]
[Music]